CHAPTER 2

APPROACH AND OVERVIEW

A: Significant Aspects of Krishnamurti's Approach In this thesis we will be concerned not with Krishnamurti's teachings during his association with the Order of the Star, but with those he offered with remarkable consistency during the more than fifty years following the dissolution of the Order. During those years Krishnamurti's language slowly freed itself from Theosophical vocabulary. Although they occasionally continued to arise in questions posed to him, Krishnamurti no longer made references to the Masters, the World-Teacher, or the Beloved in his discourses. Downplaying emphasis upon his personality, he would refer to himself as "K," or "the speaker," rarely using the personal pronoun, "I." When referring to himself prior to his realization, he would talk about "the boy."

His interaction with the public took the form of discourses, responses to questions, dialogues with individuals, small group discussions. writings, and books or other records of his talks. Virtually all these were based on spontaneous, free-flowing speech. In these activities, Krishnamurti did not set himself up as the authority. but sought an atmosphere of mutual inquiry. It was this unusual approach which, in many ways, characterizes the man and his teachings. Without an appreciation of this approach, the subsequent analysis of his teachings will be misunderstood and oversimplified.

> We are like two friends sitting in the park on a lovely day talking about life, talking about our problems, investigating the very nature of our existence, and asking ourselves seriously why life has become such a great problem.

While this request for mutual investigation seems reasonable in a dialogue or group discussion, many were baffled by Krishnamurti's suggestion that they were "talking over together," when he, by himself, was engaged in a discourse. An explanation emerges from his perception of the unity of human consciousness. During his talks, he urged the listener to

> understand that our consciousness is not our individual consciousness. Our consciousness is not only that of the specialized group, nationality, and so on, but it is also the human travail, conflict, misery, confusion and sorrow. We are examining together that human consciousness, which is our consciousness, not yours or mine, but ours.

Thus his talks were not rehearsed lectures by one person targeted at another but gestures of mutual observation. He would say:

> We are trying to observe together. It is important to bear in mind all the time that the speaker is merely pointing out something which we are examining together. It is not something onesided but rather that we are in examining, in taking a journey together and so acting together.

Another idea implicit in the activity of "thinking together," when, in fact, only one person is speaking, involves proper listening. According to him,

> There is an art of listening. To be really able to listen, one should abandon or put aside all prejudices,
pre-formulations and daily activities...you are listening when your real attention is given to
something. But unfortunately most of us listen through a screen of resistence. We are screened with prejudices, whether religious or spiritual, psychological or scientific; or with our daily worries, desires and fears...If during this discourse, anything is said which is opposed to your way of thinking and belief, just listen; do not resist. You may be right, and I may be wrong; but by listening and considering together we are going to find out what is the truth. Truth cannot be given to you by somebody. You have to discover it; and to discover it there must be a state of mind in which there is direct perception. There is no direct perception when there is a resistence, a safeguard, a protection. Understanding comes through being aware of what-is.

The notion of a screen that blocks direct perception of reality is a key concern of this thesis. It will be shown that direct perception is only possible with the event of "total insight into what-is." In a sense, Krishnamurti has already presented a central concern of his teaching in this single selection. This is typical of his approach which is remarkably straightforward and never intentionally cloaked in mystery. This theme of direct perception of what-is would then be frequently re-iterated in a wide variety of ways, and approached from virtually any point of departure. Detailed discussions of the meaning of attention, Truth, direct perception, and what-is are found in subsequent chapters of this thesis.

> Thus he and his audience would be engaged in the act of observation through attentive, non-judgemental listening.
We are not concerned with theories, with doctrines, or speculative philosophy. We are concerned with facts, with what actually is. And in understanding 'what is , non-sentimentally, non-emotionally, we can go beyond, transcend it.

Krishnamurti would thus select a particular phenomenon as a point of departure. By the term "phenomenon," I mean any element that appears within consciousness as an apparently distinct entity. Thus a phenomenon could be a sensory perception, e.g., something seen or heard, or something imagined or remembered, or an emotional state experienced, such as joy or anger. He would then approach it in a manner that he explained this way:

> We are not merely concerned with the description, with the explanation, but rather with the deep understanding of the problem, so that we are totally involved in it, so that it is the very breath of our life, not mere intellectualization.

In this respect, Krishnamurti's approach is typical of Indian philosophy, which is said by some to be linked with praxis rather than pure speculation.
Another vital dimension of Krishnamurti's approach is an insistence on self-reliance.

> The teachers, the gurus, the mahatmas, the philosophers, have all led us astray, because actually we have not solved our problems, our lives are not different. We are the same miserable, unhappy, sorrow-laden people. So the first thing is never to follow another, including the speaker. Never try to find out from another how to behave, how to live. Because what another tells you is not your life.

It is worthwhile pointing out that, according to Krishnamurti, this self-reliance does not extend to matters of technical knowledge, such as learning languages or the acquisition of facts. It would appear that self-reliance is needed in the search for the meaning behind, or purpose of life. As alluded to in the passages above, Krishnamurti insisted on self-reliance because he felt that Truth cannot be transmitted but only discovered. He suggests that none of the attempts to formulate Truth, or describe paths to its realization have been successful in altering the basic human condition, which is generally one of sorrow.
Having thus selected a phenomenon as a point of departure and having entered deeply into it so that it was experienced as a "fact" within consciousness at the moment of discussion, Krishnamurti would begin to explore the ramifications, the relationships, the source or product of that phenomenological fact. The audience would be encouraged to engage in the same process, that is, to locate and experience the fact that was the point of departure, not intellectually, but as a deeply felt reality, and then voyage along the subsequent observations made by Krishnamurti regarding the relationship between that fact and other phenomena to which it was related. Consider as an example this selection on desire:

 > For most of us desire is quite a problem: the desire for property, for position, for power, for comfort, for immortality, for continuity, the desire to be loved, to have something permanent, satisfying, lasting, something which is beyond time. Now, what is desire?...Is it not the symbol and its sensation? Desire is sensation with the object of its attainment. Is there desire without a symbol and its sensation? Obviously not.

 While we shall explore the details of his thoughts on desire more fully later, we see how Krishnamurti uses "desire" as his point of departure. He engages the audience and encourages them to seek out of their own experience an understanding of "desire" by referring to numerous examples of its manifestation. Through the use of questions, he elicits from himself answers which are then stated as facts.

In this way he develops a relationship between "desire" and "sensation." To be truly engaged with Krishnamurti in such a
discourse, the audience would have to be deeply exploring the new phenomenological "fact" of "sensation" which arises in relationship to "desire" rather than working with mere intellectual understanding of those categories. If some other phenomenon arose in the mind of the participant, such as "doubt," it would be that new phenomenological fact to which the participant's attention would be directed.

Just as a part of a hologram has the capacity to produce the whole three-dimensional picture, Krishnamurti's discourses have a holographic quality. Each point of departure, each phenomenological fact, seems to have the the whole of his teachings inexorably linked to it so that one feels that seeing into the heart of anyone problem would reveal the whole of Truth as he understood it. Thus Krishnamurti was insistent on staying close to the topic of discussion. He would parry questions that strayed from the issue being examined, and point out that certain types of questions were inappropriate or even obstacles to the perception of what-is.

According to Rene Fouere,

> Whoever has listened to his lectures can notice that Krishnamurti is solely concerned with the inner transformation of his audience and cares little for method and doctrinal elaborations. No wonder therefore that he often takes opposite stands in quick succession. He does not want to build up an intellectual system but release his listeners from the certitudes in which their minds and hearts have fallen asleep. 'People need to be awakened, not instructed,' he said once...It is not at all easy to put Krishnamurti into a system, even to repeat cogently what he wants people to learn.

Luis Vas suggests that Krishnamurti functions like a "catalyst in a chemical reaction," who through a "kind of verbal shock therapy...hopes to force his audience to think for itself and be aware, moment by moment of its mental processes and physical reactions." Seeing similarities between Alfred Korzybski's theory of General Semantics and Krishnamurti's emphasis on distinguishing the word and the fact beyond the word, Vas suggests that Korzybski's method might act as a springboard into
Krishnamurti's philosophy. This comparison between Krishnamurti and Korzybski is taken  again by Michael Gorman who suggests that both would converge on the point "that it is only through the radical processes of becoming aware of, and setting aside, all of one's preconceptions that the natural order of the world can be perceived.

When discussing a particular phenomenon Krishnamurti often began by examining the etymology of the word associated with that phenomenon. He then pointed cut how the etymology was either appropriate or unsuitable. For example, the word "meditate" comes from a root meaning to measure, but, to Krishnamurti, measurement is a function of thought, and thus has nothing to do with meditation. In the following interchange with Swami Venkatesananda we see his unorthodox play with the use and meaning of a Sanskrit word:

> __Krishnamurti:__ What is Vedanta?

> __Swami:__ The word means, "The end of the Vedas."
 In the manner of "full stop."

> __Krishnamurti:__ The end of knowledge.

> __Swami:__ Quite right, quite right. Yes, the end of knowledge; where knowledge matters no more. Yes, it's wonderful, I've never heard it put that way before. "The end of knowledge."

It was typical of Krishnamurti to release the mind's
fixation on words by using them in unorthodox ways. While Vedanta is generally understood as the "latter part" or "culmination" of the Vedas, Krishnamurti took the term veda, from the Sanskrit root, vid, as "knowledge," and since anta can mean "end" he created a cross-lingual pun that captures both the spirit of Vedanta and conveys his own message. Venkatesananda, a Sanskrit scholar, enjoyed the exchange.

Once a meaning was ascribed to a word, or a particular word was painstakingly selected to describe a phenomenon in any given exchange, Krishnamurti would insist on using that word alone rather than substituting synonyms. This technique was employed to draw attention to the phenomenological fact, and to avoid getting lost in a sea of unclear terms. Often he would insist on assigning a particular word to describe a particular phenomenon, although the word may have conventionally had many other applications. A clear example is again found in his use of the term "meditation." He refused to let the word be used
for practices commonly called meditation. Thus the
repetition of mantras, mindfulness of breathing, and any other technique were not meditation to Krishnamurti. He reserved the word for a different state of consciousness altogether, one in which there is no active doer. Krishnamurti's description of the meaning of meditation will be discussed in much greater detail later.

Occasionally, Krishnamurti would use the same word
in two different senses. He would use the word "reality" for the Ultimate Truth but also use the term for the world "put together by thought". This, we shall see, is consistent with his realization of a unity that is beyond conceptualization. This type of dual usage of the same word is also seen in the use of the word "mind." It is highly relevant to the concerns of this paper. Consider this passage:

> The mind that achieves silence as a result as the outcome of determined action, of practice, of discipline, is not a silent mind. The mind that is forced, controlled, shaped, put into a frame and kept quiet, is not a still mind.      Stillness comes only when you understand the whole process  of thought, because to understand the process is to end it and the ending of the process of thought is the beginning of silence.

Clearly Krishnamurti is referring to two qualities of mind, one controlled and conditioned, the other free and still. This example vividly points out how superficial reading of Krishnamurti's works often leads people to greater confusion or leads them to the criticism that he contradicts himself. The holographic quality of Krishnamurti's teachings are also present here, for the full solution to transforming the conditioned mind into the still mind is explained as the result of "understanding the whole process of thought." In essence, the central concern of this thesis is an exploration of the teaching of this passage.

As mentioned before, unusual style of discourse and discussion stemmed from his sense of wholeness. To him, there is an essential unity in all creation, and that unity is most apparent in human consciousness. The following selection provides an example of typical discussions that incorporate the elements of Socratic questioning, the unity of consciousness, and deep
felt movement from one phenomenological fact to another.

> K: I am asking you a simple question. You see the beggar on the road. Why is that not a shock to you? Why do you not cry? Why do I cry only when my son dies? I saw a monk in Rome. I cried to see the pain of someone tied to a post called religion. We don't cry there but we cry here. Why? There is a 'why', obviously. There is a 'why' because we are insensitive.
> B: The mind is asleep. The shock wakes it up.
> K: That's it. The shock wakes it up and we are awakened
to pain, which is our pain: we were not awakened to pain before. This is not a theory.
> P: No, sir, when you make a statement like that, I am awakened to pain and it is not a question of my pain...
> K: It is pain. Now what do you do with pain? Pain is suffering. What takes place?

     
This discussion also reveals the sort of role-playing in which Krishnamurti would engage. He asks the
initial question about suffering but then quickly enters into the state of one who is suffering to engage the discussants. The intensity of his empathy with the state of suffering, which is hardly conveyed in that brief excerpt, enables him to refute superficial solutions to the condition of suffering suggested by the group. By crying out, "I suffer. We suffer. There is suffering. What shall I do?" frequently and with remarkable urgency, he forces his audience to enter into the experience of that phenomenological fact with him. The distance normally maintained by traditional philosophical inquiry into a subject is removed. One cannot discuss the "concept" of suffering. One must enter into the "experience" of suffering and then come to terms with that existential reality. Thus
     Krishnamurti, Exploration Into Insight (London: Victor Gollancz, 1979), 72.
38
  Krishnamurti's role-playing is perhaps better described as an existential involvement. By this I mean immediate involvement with one's whole being.
It is only through understanding the intense
activity engaged in by Krishnamurti and the active audience members, which requires existential involvement with each phenomenological fact as it manifests in                rather than a mere intellectual engagement with the concepts associated with the phenomenon, that one can fully
appreciate the effectiveness of his approach. Without this understanding, one is prone to criticise his approach for
its excessive simplicity. My feeling is that such criticism is based on a misunderstanding of Krishnamurti's fundamental
teaching. It is based on disproportionate emphasis on intellect divorced from other aspects of being. Ironically, to Krishnamurti, this is the very source of much of the suffering we inflict on each other. Krishnamurti did not set himself up as a scholar. In Henry Miller's words, "What distinguishes Krishnamurti from the great teachers of the past, the masters and the exemplars, is his absolute nakedness. The one role he permits himself to play is - himself, a human being."1e With regard to the simplicity of his language, Miller says,
This sort of language is naked. revelatory and
inspiring. It pierces the clouds of philosophy which confound our thought and restores the springs of action. It levels the tottering superstructures of the verbal gymnasts and clears the ground of rubbish. • There
is something about Krishnamurti's utterances which makes the reading of books seem utterly superfluous.19
1eHenry Miller, "J. Krishnamurti - Master of Reality" in Luis S. R. Vas, ed., The Mind of J. Krishnamurti, 279. 19Ibid., 278.
39
  Drawing attention to the fact that Krishnamurti saw the Buddha as the last influence in the development of his thought, Roch Bouchard, after indicating several points of
convergence, suggests that the philosophy of Zen Buddhism provides the most valuable entry point into the intelligibility of Krishnamurti's work. He says,
Donc, bien que Krishnamurti se tienne loin du langage conceptuel. loin des livres meme. gue jamais il ne formule une these ni ne donne un definition, et qu'il refuse l'identification a un courant doctrinal, je remarque des points de convergence nombreux et important avec Ie bouddhisme Zen, et je pense que cette philosophie fournit les clefs les plus            pour
l'intelligence de son          
While Bouchard's comments on the sim ilarities
between Zen and Krishnamurti are illuminating, John Briggs points out that unlike Zen, which "intentionally sets out to frustrate thought, breaking its order," Krishnamurti's discourse "seems an order of inquiry which includes rational thought as one of its terms, and in its very structure and movement is both logical and at the same time unexpected.":O::4 He analyzes a piece of Krishnamurti's prose with several perceptive observations. When Krishnamurti prefaces his remarks by instructing the listener to neither accept not reject what is being said, Briggs suggests that this       "prevent the reader from accepting any of the abstractions as literal steps in an             
2<:>Roch Bouchard, "Krishnamurti Zen," Revue de l'Universite d'Ottawa 54 (Oct. - Dec. 1984): 98.
24John Briggs. "Metaphor, Re I igion, and the Possibility of Metaphor in Non-Metaphoric Discourse," Within the Mind: On J. Krishamurti (Madras: Krishnamurti Foundation
India, 1982), 113.             1 1 6 .
40
  By then              in       succession, a        of               which     not                  to each      
(e.g.,         is                is                is nat habit),              shocks the mind. The mind sees the               identity of these terms as if they      logically          though, in fact no logic was used. This      of effect,        points out, is         to what                the use of           Thus he suggests that while              does nat use          in his             the            themselves act like           "opening the mind
to an       that is its own attention."2;:S The advantage of utilizing the effects of                                            is that while it induces shifts in             it avoids the tendency to                       is no metaphor to               perhaps one might suggest that the whole           is itself a metaphor of Truth.        thus suggests that one could treat Krishnamurti's mode of
inquiry, in a fashion similar to poetry, as a      of art. I         suggest that                use of the
verb "to be" is- quite significant and         to his sense of wholeness. As we shall later see, to him the qualities of the whole cannot be           from the whole. They     all part of an indivisible unity. Therefore when speaking from the perspective of wholeness, every name, quality, and activity is synonymous.
The finer aspects of Krishnamurti's approach in teaching are actually articulated extensively in his
discussions of education. These discussions may be found in 23Ibid., 116.
41
  the books, Education and the Significance of Life, Krishnamurti on Education, the Letters to the Schools, Brij B. Khare's collection of discussions Krishnamurti had with students, teachers, and professors, entitled Things of the Mind, and numerous audiotaped discussions with teachers and students at the Krishnamurti schools in India, England, and the United States. There is also a series of discussions held at Wolf Lake School, the Krishnamurti school that existed for six years near           Canada.
Rohit Mehta takes pains to point out that Krishnamurti's "approach" is more important than any particular subject he discusses. Proper understanding of his approach is crucial for the proper appreciation of what he discusses.24 I concur wholeheartedly with this view and cannot overstate the importance of keeping in mind the inevitable neglect I will pay to Krishnamurti's approach when performing the analysis of his teachings in subsequent chapters.
What is Krishnamurti's approach in all his discussions? His endeavour was not to provide information for subsequent reflection. "Are you learning or are you having an "insight" into it?," he would ask.
Learning implies authority. Are you learning and acting from learning? • Either you accumulate knowledge
and act or you go out, act and learn. Both are acting according to knowledge. So knowledge become the authority. . And somebody like K says: 'Look at it differently, look at action with insight - not accumulate knowledge and act but insight and action. In that there is no             
24See Rohit Mehta, The Nameless Experience: A Comprehensive Discussion of J. Krishnamurti's Approach to Life (Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1973), 29-31.
                Exploration Into Insight, 24.
42
