**Day One**

> If one may, one would like to point out that we are a gathering of serious people who are daily life. We are not concerned whatsoever with be11efs, ideologies, suppositions, theoretical conclusions or theological concepts, nor are we trying to found a sect, a group of people who follow somebody. We are not, let's hope, frivolous, but rather we are concerned together with what is happening in the world - all the tragedies, the utter misery, poverty - and our responsibility to it.

Typical to his educational approach, Krishnamurti sets the tone of the discourse. He and his audience are engaged 1n something together. It is an endeavour that requires focused mental energy. It is non-authoritarian. His point of departure is the suffering that accompanies the human condition and the concern is our response to it.

> The whole world is in a great state of crisis and the
crisis is not only out there but also If you are aware of all this, what is the responsability for it on the part of each one of us?...what is one to do?"

Pointing out the relationship between the world situation and the individual, Krishnamurti suggests that "responsibility" implies both the part one plays in the creation and maintenance of suffering and one's response to suffering.

Through repeated through questioning, through numerous references to the realities of terrorism, environmental destruction, economic struggle, political and religious division, he urges the audience to enter into direct experience of this aspect of the human condition.

> Why is man born like this? Why has he become after many, many millenia what he is now - suffering, anxious, lonely, despairing. with disease, death and always the gods somewhere about?

Paralleling the approach of the Krishnamurti's point of departure is the reality of suffering. He takes great pain to have his audience move away from an intellectual stance on the concept of suffering, but enter into direct experience of suffering as a reality within the world and their own selves. He then proceeds to ask about the cause or origin of suffering which is related to inner conflict.

> What is the cause of this conflict, not only outwardly but also most deeply, inwardly, subjectively, inside the skin as it were - why is he in conflict?...Is there an answer to this question, a final, irrefutable answer? That is, can human beings in this world, living their daily life, going to the office, keeping a house, sex, children and all that, and also with this search, this longing for something much more than the mere material things of life - can they cease from conflict?

Thus in the first few minutes of his first talk, Krishnamurti has already framed the questions that constitute the direction of exploration that his discourses will take. There is the reality of human suffering. What is its cause? Can it be eliminated? The suffering he addresses is not just the frustration experienced by failure to achieve material ends but also that inherent in the spiritual quest.

> So let us explore this curse which man has borne from the beginning of time: why man, which includes woman please, lives this way; why man is in conflict in his
own intimate relationships. sexually, in the family - the whole network of conflict...must human beings bear with it, get accustomed to it, hold it, never be able to put it completely aside, so that their brains can function as they should, completely untethered. completely free, not programmed, not conditioned?

  The suffering that Krishnamurti is referring to is not the physical suffering that rssults from disease or accident,
but the psychological suffering that accompanies conflict and the suffering we inflict on each other as a result of
it. While he suggests that suffering has no beginning, or began with the creation of time, his discourses will explore the possibility of completely ending inner conflict. He already suggests a relationship between conflict and a conditioned brain. Thus the approach to the resolution of conflict is mainly through examination of internal phenomena, phenomena in human consciousness. Krishnamurti rejects analysis as a route.

> Where does one start to understand the whole movement of conflict?...One way...is to analyse very carefully all the factors of conflict, one after another - through self-analysis or being analyzed by another, or accepting the advice of professors, philosophers, psychologists...Or is there a different approach to the question?             

He continues:

> analysis implies one who is the analyser - right? Therefore there is an analyser and the analysed, the subject and the object. Is there such a difference in oneself as the subject and the object?...The analyser has been encouraged through education, through conditioning, through being programmed, to believe that he, the analyser, is completely different from that which he analyses, but the speaker says, ...I question it; I question not only the activity of analysis but who is the analyser. If you can understand the analyser first then what need is there for analysis?

Thus Krishnamurti questions and rejects analysis as an approach since it involves a fundamental division within human consciousness. The very division between an observed phenomenon and the one who observes creates inner conflict.

> The speaker says that the moment there is a division between the analyser and the analysed there must inevitably be conflict of some kind, subtle, fatuous, without meaning, but it is a conflict - to overcome, conquer, suppress, transcend - all these are efforts in minor or major form.

It is necessary to point out that there is an important distinction between objective and subjective division.

> wherever there is division there must be conflict. Not that there is not division; the rich are very powerful. But if we create subjectively a division - I belong to this and you belong to that, I am a Catholic, you are a Protestant, I am a Jew and you are an Arab - then there is conflict.

Subjective division, Krishnamurti points out, is division between the self, the ego, the 'I', and other phenomena. This leads to conflict and contradiction in behavior. It is the opposite of peace.

> Everyone talks about peace. Every government, every religion, and every preacher, including the speaker talks about peace. And to live peacefully demands tremendous honesty and Intelligence.

The honesty intelligence demands a quality of passion in the inquiry. Only in this way can one proceed without deception or any sense of illusion to the solution of the problem of conflict. The passion and honesty lead to the realization that

> at the end of it you stand alone, but there is the comprehension, the inward awareness, insight, into all that which is really nonsensical. Belonging to something, belonging to a group, belonging to some sect, may give one momentary satisfaction but that is all becoming rather weary, wretched and ugly.

Here we recognize the central nature of "insight" which is equated with comprehension, inward awareness, and aloneness.

True relationship in consciousness, to Krishnamurti, does not stem from joining an organization or adhering to an ideology, but is a fundamental reality.

> Strangely, your brain, though not the brain of another, is also the other - vou understand? Your brain is like the brain of every other human being. It has immense capacity, immense energy...Our brains are not ours, they have evolved through a long period of time...that brain with its consciousness is not mine because my consciousness is shared with every other human being.

He continues:

> in actuality there is this strange irrevocable fact that we all go through the same mould, the same anxiety, hope, fear, death, loneliness that brings such desperation. So we are mankind. And when one realizes that deeply, conflict with another ceases because you are like me.

This illustrates the importance Krishnamurti places on the proper functioning of the brain which is both the object of conditioning as well as the instrument of realization of the connectedness of human consciousness. For proper functioning, the brain must be free.

> Do we ever stop gathering? For practical things in life one has to gather, but to see where gathering is not necessary, that is where the art of living comes.
Because if we are gathering, our brain is never free, is never empty...This gathering conditions the brain.
Enlightenment is not gathering. On the contrary it is total freedom from all that...Love is the quality of a brain that doesn't gather anything at all.
      
Thus love arises from death to accumulation and is an attribute of enlightenment.
